---
layout: post
title: "Lesson 00 - R&D Stream"
author: Jeremy
tags:
 - R&D stream
comments: true
---
## Welcome to the Python course @ Precima

Hopefully, by now, everyone has read the syllabus, cheat sheets and course
outline on the
[main website](/pythoncourse).

Moreover, in this lesson, it's assumed you either attended the Applied Stream
intro to data
types lecture, and/or have read through [Lesson 00 - Applied
Section](/pythoncourse/2016/02/09/lesson00applied.html).

Today we will briefly go over the Anaconda environment and
then dive into Python statements and functions.

All lessons are made as iPython/Jupyter notebooks and will be available on this
site to
download. Grab todays lesson from [this
link!](/pythoncourse/assets/notebooks/r&d/lesson 00.ipynb).

### Python

Python is a programming language first released in 1991 by Guido van Rossum and
one of the most popular languages used in computing today. Python currently
ranks as the [5th most common language used on
github](https://github.com/blog/2047-language-trends-on-github).

Python is used as a scripting language, as well as in web development and to
create applications - some of the more popular websites and applications running
at least partially on Python include: Google, Youtube, Facebook, Instagram,
Reddit, Dropbox, Civilization IV, EVE Online and BitTorrent.

Python as a language is based on readability, flexibility, simplicity and
extensibility.

The extensibility of Python has caused it to be adopted, along with R, as one of
the premier data science programming languages.

Python has had many added on modules (or libraries) added to it, to allow data
science work which we will cover in this course.

In general compared to R, Python is faster, more programmer focussed and less
restrictive in licensing. The downside is new statistical methods tend to appear
in R before Python, although as the community grows, this has become less of a
problem.


### 2.7 vs 3

In 2008, Python version 3.0 was released. Due to the number and nature of
changes, Python 2.6 and Python 3.0 were not compatible. This has lead to a split
in the Python community, as many users were unwilling to fix existing code to 3
compatibility, and have since continued to develop Python 2.6 into 2.7, while
3.0 has been developed in parallel and currently stands at version 3.5.

In this course, we will use Python 3. This is due to the majority of users
having no legacy code to worry about, the better memory management, and the
availability of the data science stack in Python 3. If you are a die hard Python
2.7 user, feel free to continue using it, although you will need to fix the code
yourself.

In the level we will be coding at the changes are not too big, the largest
differences we will see are `print()` vs `print`, `xrange` vs `range` and other
generators. Python code found online will often be 2.7, but should be readable
by a 3 trained user.


### Anaconda, Spyder and iPython/Jupyter

We will use Anaconda, a distribution of Python by Continuum Analytics, put
together for use in data science.

Anaconda comes with most of the modules we need for data analysis. The Anaconda
launcher
updates and launches these apps, and includes:

(i) Spyder, which is the IDE we will use for the first few lessons. It allows
coding and
running scripts in an integrated environment.

(ii) The iPython/Jupyter notebook, which is a platform for developing interative
code-driven
documents (like these lessons!) in a browser. (iPython notebooks
are currently in the process of being rebranded into Jupyter
notebooks. The launcher and documentation - and we - will refer to them
interchangeably).

(ii)  The iPython-QT console, which is an advanced console allowing
inline graphing

These programs all run Python on the backend - the difference is in how you
interact with the environment, the possibilities that the environment provides,
and how
the input and output of your code is displayed and documented.


### Course Logistics


We will start the first part of the course by covering the data types and
structures,
before move on to loops and statements, then functions and classes. After that,
we will
introduce the standard data modules, Pandas and NumPy. Then, we will move onto
graphing,
optimization, machine learning and other fun topics.

Please note that the topics for the second half of the R&D class can be somewhat
flexible - they
can be adapted to suit the common interests of the class. So please let me know
if you are working
on something particular, or would like to look at a specific application or
problem, and we can
try and address these in the later classes.

Finally, note that we are tracking both group and individual progress, to make
sure this course is
giving value for your time. In this light, all attendees are required to
complete all quizzes and assessments
we will send out during the course. The time committment for this section is, at
minimum, 5 hours a week (though
a few more hours is strongly recommended).

One last thing: coding along with the lesson is encouraged!

### Outside Resources

A number of people have asked about text books or online resources for the
course. Most Python tutorials online will assume a knowledge at around the level
we will reach after a few lessons. I'm using [Python for Data
Analysis](http://shop.oreilly.com/product/0636920023784.do) for the Numpy and
Pandas section - it won't be necessary to purchase but is a good book (if a
little outdated). For the other lessons, links will be provided to the relevant
docs.



### Basic Data Types Review

| Type       | Example     | Mutable | Ordered | Duplicates | Subsetting |
|------------|-------------|---------|---------|------------|------------|
| int        | 2           | NA      | NA      | NA         | NA         |
| float      | 2.5         | NA      | NA      | NA         | NA         |
| complex    | 2.5 + 0.6J  | NA      | NA      | NA         | NA         |
| boolean    | True        | NA      | NA      | NA         | NA         |
| string     | 'abcd'      | No      | Yes     | Yes        | x[1]       |
| list       | [1,2,3,'a'] | Yes     | Yes     | Yes        | x[1]       |
| tuple      | (1,2,3,'a') | No      | Yes     | Yes        | x[1]       |
| set        | {1,2,3,4}   | Yes     | No      | No         | No         |
| frozenset  | {1,2,3,4}   | No      | No      | No         | No         |
| dictionary | {1:1,2:2}   | Yes     | No      | No         | x['key']   |


### Numbers - Advanced


Internally, floats are stored as double in `C` - use sys.float_info for more
information about tolerances etc.

**In [1]:**

{% highlight python %}
import sys
sys.float_info
{% endhighlight %}




    sys.float_info(max=1.7976931348623157e+308, max_exp=1024, max_10_exp=308, min=2.2250738585072014e-308, min_exp=-1021, min_10_exp=-307, dig=15, mant_dig=53, epsilon=2.220446049250313e-16, radix=2, rounds=1)



Integers have unlimited precision

**In [2]:**

{% highlight python %}
z = 10**1000000 +1
z % 10
{% endhighlight %}




    1



Python 2.7 has another class, `large` for large numbers, Python 3 makes the
conversion implicilty and keeps type `int`:

**In [3]:**

{% highlight python %}
print(type(z))
del(z)
{% endhighlight %}

    <class 'int'>


### Booleans - Advanced

In addition to the standard boolean operators (<,>,==,!=,) mentioned in the
intro
class, there are five others: `in`,`is`,`not`, `any` and `all`. Any and all will
be introduced in the functional programming section.

**In [4]:**

{% highlight python %}
l = ['oranges','apples','bananas','bananas','kiwis']
'oranges' in l
{% endhighlight %}




    True



**In [5]:**

{% highlight python %}
l = 5
5 is l
##very similar to ==
{% endhighlight %}




    True



**In [6]:**

{% highlight python %}
#we are checking identity, not equality
l = ['oranges','apples','bananas']
k = ['oranges','apples','bananas']
print(l is k)
k = l
print(l is k)
{% endhighlight %}

    False
    True


**In [7]:**

{% highlight python %}
not True
{% endhighlight %}




    False



In Python (and most sensible languages), boolean comparisons are short circuit
operators - once one conditon is impossible we stop evaluating. This can get a
good speed up on code if you have one expensive comparison and one that is not -
Therefore, put the cheap calculation first!

**In [8]:**

{% highlight python %}
#del(l)
x = "bananas"
#l is not defined! This would give and error if it hits l
print(x == "bananas" or l == 4)
print(x == "bananas" and l == 4)
{% endhighlight %}

    True
    False


### Data Structures Review

**In [9]:**

{% highlight python %}
customer_1 = {'loyaltyids':(1234, 3456),
              'transactions':{1:['oranges','apples','bananas','pears','kiwis'],
                              2:['bread', 'milk','bananas','bananas']},
              'postalcodes':{'M5T1V1', 'M5S3B2'},
              'transactionspends':[100.46, 34.55],
              'usedcoupons':[True, False]}
{% endhighlight %}

**In [10]:**

{% highlight python %}
#subsetting here
{% endhighlight %}

## Python Statements

Python uses indentation, rather than braces, as its primary way of parsing loops
and statements. This was originally to force some degree of readability on code.

### If, Else, Elif

We can do if and else statements

**In [11]:**

{% highlight python %}
x = 4.99

if not True:
    print(x)
elif x < 5:
    print('on sale')
else:
    print('regular price')


#if True:
#print(x)
{% endhighlight %}

    on sale


and nest them as deep as we would like:

**In [12]:**

{% highlight python %}
pricehistory = [11]

if pricehistory[-1] >= 10 and len(pricehistory) == 1:
    if pricehistory[-1] >= 12:
        pricehistory.append(pricehistory[0] - 1)
        print('new price is ' + str(pricehistory[-1]))
    else:
        pricehistory.append(pricehistory[0] - 0.10 * pricehistory[-1])
        print('new price is ' + str(pricehistory[-1]))
elif len(pricehistory) > 1:
    pricehistory.append(min(pricehistory))
    print('new price is ' + str(pricehistory[-1]))
else:
    pricehistory.append(pricehistory[0]*0.9)
    print('new price is ' + str(pricehistory[-1]))

pricehistory
{% endhighlight %}

    new price is 9.9





    [11, 9.9]



### For loops

For loops work similarly in syntax to if and else. We can use them on any of the
major data structures we just introduced

**In [13]:**

{% highlight python %}
l = ['oranges','bread','bananas','milk']
fruits = ['oranges','apples','bananas','kiwis','strawberries', 'pears']

for item in l:
    if item in fruits:
        print("fruit")
    else:
        print("other")

print("\n")
s = ['oranges','bread','bananas','milk']

for item in s:
    if item in fruits:
        print("fruit")
    else:
        print("other")
{% endhighlight %}

    fruit
    other
    fruit
    other


    fruit
    other
    fruit
    other


On dictionaries, we have to do it a little differently

**In [14]:**

{% highlight python %}
d = {'produce':'banana', 'dairy':'milk', 'canned':'chickpeas'}

for k, v in d.items():
    print(k + ": " + v)
#unordered!

#similar for nested lists:

l = [[1,2],[3,4],[5,6],[7,8]]

for one, two in l:
    print(one * two)
    #no modifying!
    one = one * 2
l
{% endhighlight %}

    canned: chickpeas
    dairy: milk
    produce: banana
    2
    12
    30
    56





    [[1, 2], [3, 4], [5, 6], [7, 8]]



### While loops

Similarly, we can use while loops, and run a loop until a condition is met

**In [15]:**

{% highlight python %}
x = 5

while x > 1:
    print(x)
    x -= 1
#also +=, *=, /=
{% endhighlight %}

    5
    4
    3
    2


### Break, Pass, Continue

We can skip, break or pass elements in our loops

**In [16]:**

{% highlight python %}
l = [1,2,3,4,"oranges",6]

for num in l:
    if type(num) == int:
        print(num)
    else:
        print(num + " is not a number")
        break

for num in l:
    if type(num) == int:
        print(num)
    else:
        print(num + " is not a number")
        continue
        print("how did you get here?")

for num in l:
    if type(num) == int:
        print(num)
    else:
        print(num + " is not a number")
        pass
        print("how did you get here?")
{% endhighlight %}

    1
    2
    3
    4
    oranges is not a number
    1
    2
    3
    4
    oranges is not a number
    6
    1
    2
    3
    4
    oranges is not a number
    how did you get here?
    6


**In [17]:**

{% highlight python %}
#example
basket = [['apples', 2.50], ["oranges", 3.00], ['razors', 10.99], ['potatoes', 4.99], ['toothbrush', 2.99], ['pumpkin', 2.98],
          [9.99, "strawberries"]]
fruits = ['oranges','apples','bananas','kiwis','strawberries', 'pears']
veges = ['potatoes', 'parsnips', 'cabbage', 'pumpkins']

fruit = 0
veg = 0
other = []

while len(basket) > 0:
    x = basket.pop()
    if x[0] in fruits:
        fruit += x[1]
    elif x[0] in veges:
        veg += x[1]
    else:
        if isinstance(x[0], str) and isinstance(x[1], float):
            other.append(x)
        else:
            print(x, "not proper item")
            pass

#print(fruit, veg, other)

{% endhighlight %}

    [9.99, 'strawberries'] not proper item


### Range

We saw earlier, we cannot modify in place using a loop. We can instead use
`range` to generate indices and use these (NB range in Python 3 is similar to
xrange in Python 2.7, not `range`). Range objects are not instantly enumerated -
we dont have to hold them in memory.

**In [18]:**

{% highlight python %}
#similar to the subset from:to:by
range(0,10,2)
type(range(0,10))
{% endhighlight %}




    range



**In [19]:**

{% highlight python %}
#not instantly enumerated! this would fill the memory of nearly all computers
range(100000000000000000)
{% endhighlight %}




    range(0, 100000000000000000)



**In [20]:**

{% highlight python %}
l = [1,2,3,4,5,6]
range(len(l))
{% endhighlight %}




    range(0, 6)



**In [21]:**

{% highlight python %}
for i in range(len(l)):
    l[i] = l[i]*2
l
{% endhighlight %}




    [2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12]



**In [22]:**

{% highlight python %}
#also useful for generating simple lists:
list(range(10))
{% endhighlight %}




    [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]



We also have the built in function, `enumerate` which can give us a tuple of the
index and value at each position in a sequence:

**In [23]:**

{% highlight python %}
cheese = ['gouda','cheddar','edam','brie']
print(list(enumerate(cheese)))
for i,j in enumerate(cheese):
    print('item {i} is {j}'.format(i = i, j = j))
{% endhighlight %}

    [(0, 'gouda'), (1, 'cheddar'), (2, 'edam'), (3, 'brie')]
    item 0 is gouda
    item 1 is cheddar
    item 2 is edam
    item 3 is brie


### Zip

zip is a built in python function, that 'zips' sequences into tuples:

**In [24]:**

{% highlight python %}
item = ['oranges','apples','bananas','kiwis','strawberries']
cost = [7,8,9,10,11]
units = [12,13,14,15,16]
list(zip(item,cost,units))
{% endhighlight %}




    [('oranges', 7, 12),
     ('apples', 8, 13),
     ('bananas', 9, 14),
     ('kiwis', 10, 15),
     ('strawberries', 11, 16)]



### Comprehensions

Comprehensions are are syntactic sugar for for loops. We can make lists (or set
or dicts) using this method. Tuples might seem like they should also have a
method, but this is reserved for generators, which will discuss later on in the
course.


**In [25]:**

{% highlight python %}
#for loop
l = []
for i in range(10):
    l.append(i * 5)
l
{% endhighlight %}




    [0, 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35, 40, 45]



**In [26]:**

{% highlight python %}
#comprehension
[i * 5 for i in range(10)]
{% endhighlight %}




    [0, 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35, 40, 45]



**In [27]:**

{% highlight python %}
#dict comprehension
{i * 10 : j * 2  for i, j in {1: 'a', 2: 'b'}.items()}
{% endhighlight %}




    {10: 'aa', 20: 'bb'}



**In [28]:**

{% highlight python %}
celsius = [0,100,25,37]
[((9/5)*temp + 32) for temp in celsius]
{% endhighlight %}




    [32.0, 212.0, 77.0, 98.60000000000001]



**In [29]:**

{% highlight python %}
#nested
matrix = [[1,2,3],[4,5,6],[7,8,9]]
[[el * 2 for el in row] for row in matrix]
{% endhighlight %}




    [[2, 4, 6], [8, 10, 12], [14, 16, 18]]



### Ternary expressions

Ternary expressions are a fancy way of doing `if` `else` and are very pythonic:

**In [30]:**

{% highlight python %}
a = 12
a if a > 11 else b
{% endhighlight %}




    12



**In [31]:**

{% highlight python %}
a = 10
b = "no"
a if a > 11 else b
{% endhighlight %}




    'no'



we can chain this with our comprehensions

**In [32]:**

{% highlight python %}
[a if a else 2 for a in [0,1,0,3]]
{% endhighlight %}




    [2, 1, 2, 3]



or our nested comprehensions

**In [33]:**

{% highlight python %}
matrix = [[1,2,3],[4,5,6],[7,8,9]]
[[el * 2 if el % 2 == 0 else el for el in row] for row in matrix]
{% endhighlight %}




    [[1, 4, 3], [8, 5, 12], [7, 16, 9]]



As these comprehensions are not faster than a for loop, it is worth using for
loops once you can't follow clearly what the comprehension is doing (I would
almost never use a nested comprehension)!

**In [34]:**

{% highlight python %}
cheese = {'gouda': 9.99, 'cheddar': 8.99, 'edam': 6.99, 'brie': 10.99}
cheese.update({i + ' sale' : round(j * 0.9, 2) for i, j in cheese.items()})
{% endhighlight %}

## Motivation

How much can we actually learn and predict from Data Science using Python?

Recently, a match fixing ring in professional tennis was alleged by a joint
investigation between [BBC news](http://www.bbc.com/sport/tennis/35319202) and
[Buzzfeed](http://www.buzzfeed.com/heidiblake/the-tennis-racket#.eplO3d4px),
resulting in a large amount of news coverage.

The data analysis carried out was done in Python, and released online as an
[iPython Notebook](https://github.com/BuzzFeedNews/2016-01-tennis-betting-
analysis/blob/master/notebooks/tennis-analysis.ipynb). This story, and its
continued fall out, was [front page news on the
Guardian](http://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/09/revealed-tennis-umpires-
secretly-banned-gambling-scam) last week (9-Feb-2016).

Have a read through the notebook, take note of the functions and methods used on
the data, and see if you believe the analysis.

## Exercises

First, run through the exercises from the applied streams lesson 1 if you have
not already done this.

* `in` can generalise to strings - `'im' in 'Precima'` will give True. Can you
think of a way to test if letters are in a string in any order? For now, ignore
any duplicates. 'imP' should resolve to True if compared to 'Precima'

* Rewrite your answer above using `all`, a for loop, and a comprehension (if you
didn't use these). Which one feels the most natural to you?

* We have a nested dictionary of transactions - dict =
{'user1':{1:345,2:546.5,3:987}, 'user2':{1:546, 2:744.4, 3:454.4}}. Use a nested
list comprehension to get out a list of the values:[[345, 546.5, 987], [546,
744.4, 454.4]]. Can you think of a better way? Can you zip this list to [(345,
546), (546.5, 744.4), (987, 454.4)]?

* Why does range not enumerate to a list all at once? How can you force it to?

* How does zip behave on lists of different sizes? (l = [1,2,3], k =
[1,2,3,4,5]). Make a loop that works until the longest list ends. What should
the output look like and why?

* We can index previous members of a sequence in a for loop, using a number of
methods. Use `enumerate` and a for loop to test whether each member of list l =
[1,1,2,3,5,8,13,21,34,55,88,143] is the sum of the previous two objects of the
list. Think about how to treat the first two values. The output should look be a
list of booleans

* Rewrite the previous loop using range. How will you treat the first two values
now? Can you think of a way to do this using only for i in l (nb off the top of
my head, I can't)?

* Write a list comprehension giving True for only those values which are perfect
cubes - ie x\*\*1/3 gives an integer. Think about how to avoid floating point
errors: use google, or use a function I briefly introduced today. l =
[1,8,16,27,64] will give [True, True, False, True, True]

* Write the above as a for loop.

* Can your solution handle negative values? If not, modify it so that it can. 
