---
layout: post
title: "Lesson 09 - r&d"
author: Jeremy
tags:
 - R&D stream
comments: true
---
## Lesson 09 - Workflow and working on the Server

Welcome to lesson 10.

Today we will cover the basics of working on the server - managing packages in a
virtual environment, connecting to and running queries with SQL, parallel
processing and a brief introduction to version control.



### Virtual Environments

When working on a server, we need to be cognizant that others are also using the
server. Even if we have permissions to install packages we probably shouldn't -
what if we want to upgrade pandas for ourselves, while our coworkers are using
it?

Similarly, we may be working on projects where we need specifically to not have
a certain module installed, or only install a certain version.

To fix these problems, we can install a ['virtual
environment'](http://docs.python-guide.org/en/latest/dev/virtualenvs/) and use
this as the location to load our modules from.

Anaconda comes with a [virtual env
manager](http://conda.pydata.org/docs/using/envs.html), the most commonly used
non-conda version is virtualenv and virtualenvwrapper. They work similarly to
conda.

Let's check what environments we have available:

```
conda info --envs
```

Let's make a new environment, called sqlproj which has installed pyodbc:

```
conda create -n sqlproj pyodbc
```

Now switch to this env:

```
activate sqlproj
```

Now that we are in our project, if we open python, we get our new version:

```
python
```

**In [1]:**

{% highlight python %}
import pyodbc
import pandas
{% endhighlight %}


    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    ImportError                               Traceback (most recent call last)

    <ipython-input-1-235fb7d14406> in <module>()
    ----> 1 import pyodbc
          2 import pandas


    ImportError: No module named 'pyodbc'


Huh, we don't have pandas? By default, none of our previous packages come with
us. This is to stop us copying our environment to a new computer and have it no
longer work.

Let's install pandas:

```
conda install pandas
```

or, if we aren't in the env:

```
conda install -n pyodbc pandas
```

If we want a specific version, we can specify it:

```
conda install -n pyodbc pandas=0.15.0
```

We can even specify a python version here....

Deactivate:
```
deactivate
```

We can export our configuration:

```
conda env export > env.yml
```

and use that to share our setup with colleagues:

```
conda env create -f env.yml
```

### Connecting to the databases

netezza is unfortunately a non-free piece of software, and so has a couple of
integration issues with python.

Luckily, it is compliant with
[ODBC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_Database_Connectivity), so we can use
the pyodbc module to connect to our database.

[sql-alchemy](http://www.sqlalchemy.org/) is also a possibility, but is much
more involved!

We have two choices - we can run python on the server, and connect to the
database locally, or we can run python on our computer and connect to the
database remotely.

The exact configuration will depend on your server! We currently can work with
the R&D servers - individual servers may require some setup - Please email any
errors you get to me and we will endeavour to make sure we can connect!

**In [2]:**

{% highlight python %}
#import odbc
#in general:
#conn = pyodbc.connect("DRIVER={NetezzaSQL};SERVER=<myserver>;PORT=<myport>;DATABASE=<mydbschema>;UID=<user>;PWD=<password>;")
#using DSN
#conn = pyodbc.connect(dsn = 'server', UID = 'uname', PWD = 'PWD') #server eg:prcmusf
{% endhighlight %}

I don't have access to your servers, so here is a simple sqlite database:

**In [3]:**

{% highlight python %}
import sqlite3
import pandas as pd

x = sqlite3.connect('c:/users/jeremy/downloads/survey.db')
#database from software carpentry, http://files.software-carpentry.org/survey.db
#same as the above connection!
{% endhighlight %}

Once we have a connection, we need to create a cursor. A cursor is a control
structure which allows us to interact with the database

**In [4]:**

{% highlight python %}
cxn = x.cursor()

cxn.execute('select * from person')
#can do much more complicated....
#declaritive
{% endhighlight %}




    <sqlite3.Cursor at 0x1e3fe568e30>



**In [None]:**

{% highlight python %}
print(cxn.fetchall())
print(cxn.fetchall())
{% endhighlight %}

It looks a lot like a generator! (NB it isn't...).

We can go line by line, or use it like an iterable:

**In [5]:**

{% highlight python %}
cxn.execute('select * from person')

print(cxn.fetchone())
{% endhighlight %}

    ('dyer', 'William', 'Dyer')


**In [6]:**

{% highlight python %}
for row in cxn.execute('SELECT * FROM person'):
    print(row)
{% endhighlight %}

    ('dyer', 'William', 'Dyer')
    ('pb', 'Frank', 'Pabodie')
    ('lake', 'Anderson', 'Lake')
    ('roe', 'Valentina', 'Roerich')
    ('danforth', 'Frank', 'Danforth')


pandas has built in sql integration, through recently is has been reduced to use
the sql-alchemy backend.

We use the database connection, rather than the cursor:

**In [8]:**

{% highlight python %}
df = pd.read_sql('select * from Person', x)
df
{% endhighlight %}




<div>
<table border="1" class="dataframe">
  <thead>
    <tr style="text-align: right;">
      <th></th>
      <th>ident</th>
      <th>personal</th>
      <th>family</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <th>0</th>
      <td>dyer</td>
      <td>William</td>
      <td>Dyer</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>1</th>
      <td>pb</td>
      <td>Frank</td>
      <td>Pabodie</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>2</th>
      <td>lake</td>
      <td>Anderson</td>
      <td>Lake</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>3</th>
      <td>roe</td>
      <td>Valentina</td>
      <td>Roerich</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>4</th>
      <td>danforth</td>
      <td>Frank</td>
      <td>Danforth</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>
</div>



**In [9]:**

{% highlight python %}
df['newcol'] = [1,2,3,4,5]
{% endhighlight %}

**In [10]:**

{% highlight python %}
#df.to_sql('data1', x)
pd.read_sql('select * from data1', x)
{% endhighlight %}




<div>
<table border="1" class="dataframe">
  <thead>
    <tr style="text-align: right;">
      <th></th>
      <th>index</th>
      <th>ident</th>
      <th>personal</th>
      <th>family</th>
      <th>newcol</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <th>0</th>
      <td>0</td>
      <td>dyer</td>
      <td>William</td>
      <td>Dyer</td>
      <td>1</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>1</th>
      <td>1</td>
      <td>pb</td>
      <td>Frank</td>
      <td>Pabodie</td>
      <td>2</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>2</th>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>lake</td>
      <td>Anderson</td>
      <td>Lake</td>
      <td>3</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>3</th>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>roe</td>
      <td>Valentina</td>
      <td>Roerich</td>
      <td>4</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>4</th>
      <td>4</td>
      <td>danforth</td>
      <td>Frank</td>
      <td>Danforth</td>
      <td>5</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>
</div>



In general, we should keep the sql inside python to a minimum - netezza is a
little finicky with it's integration, so run a sql command, and then read in all
the data.

### Scripts vs Notebooks

The i in iPython stands for interactive. In general, we should use iPython to
develop code, test and run it, and then run as scripts for production. The
current move is in to using notebooks in production - we can run them on the
server, and interact with them from our own computers - This however requires
running a web facing server which is not super secure.

We will see if this is possible for our setup...

In the mean time, see how easy it is to convert a notebook to script.py

### Parallel Processing

Without getting into the exact details of the Python source code, Python (or
more explicitly, Cython) uses a Global interpreter lock, or
[GIL](https://wiki.python.org/moin/GlobalInterpreterLock) to prevent
multithreading. This is so that we don't accidentally modify objects in one
thread, which we migth access in another.

This means that parallel procesisng in Python is a little complicated - It is
hard to work in a Python session with multiple threaded Python code. What
normally happens is a couple of tricks which either effectively open a new
Python process, or we can use compiled code called by python to do the parallel
work.

Because we need multiple sessions, we are not sharing memory. Each object has to
be reloaded into memory of each process, leading to troubles with memory, and in
pandas, a significant slowdown. At the moment, there is a concerted effort
([dask](http://dask.pydata.org/en/latest/)) to bring parallel computing to
pandas, as well as some [experimental support for bypassing the
GIL](https://www.continuum.io/content/pandas-releasing-gil).

For now, let's stick with numpy, where parallel processing is well implemented.
We will then cover how we can use the iPython parallel procesisng implementation
to generalise our parallel work.

**In [None]:**

{% highlight python %}

{% endhighlight %}

### Version Control

Every piece of code should be under version control!!

It seems that there is no company wide version control system set up - so let's
use git. We could also use SVN or mecurial.

Version control allows us to track changes on our code. By making a series of
commits, we can see the changes we made, who made them, and roll them back if
necessary.

Install git from [here](https://git-scm.com/downloads).

Let's play around a small amount as an introduction - you will want to learn a
lot more before git is useful for you!

```
mkdir gittest
cd gittest
dir
```

Now we initialise a git repository:

```
git init
dir
```

Turns out it's a hidden folder:

```
dir /a
```

We can get status using git status:
```
git status
```

Ok, so let's get coding:

**In [11]:**

{% highlight python %}
def fibo(x):
    if x < 3:
        return 1
    a,b,counter = 1,2,3
    while counter < x:
        a,b,counter = b,a+b,counter+1
    return(b)
#saved as fibo.py
{% endhighlight %}

Now run git status:

```
git status
```

we can see that we have an untracked file!

```
git add fibo.py
#or git add --all
git status
```

Now we commit the change!

```
git commit -m "initial commit of fibo.py"
git status
```

We can see the history using git log:

```
git log
```

Now let's fix our function!

**In [13]:**

{% highlight python %}
def fibo(x):
    '''
    fixed version!
    '''
    if x < 1:
        if x < 0:
            raise ValueError()
        else:
            return(0)
    if x < 3:
        return 1
    a,b,counter = 1,2,3
    while counter < x:
        a,b,counter = b,a+b,counter+1
    return(b)
#saved as fibo.py
{% endhighlight %}

again git status allows us to see we have changes.

git diff allows us to see what they are:
```
git diff
```

we can then add and commit the changes:

```
git add --all
git commit -m "passes tests, docstring"
git log
```

Now if we accidently delete our file, we can restore it:

```
git checkout head fibo.py
```

or if our changes are no good, we can revert:

```
git checkout head~1 fibo.py
```

git is not github! Github is a website built on remote hosting of git
repositories. You probably can't use it for work code, but it is useful to see
how it works.

We can clone down from github:

```
cd ..
git clone https://github.com/jeremycg/pythoncourse
cd pythoncourse
git log
#you probably want the raw branch:
git checkout raw
```

For more information on git, see the online course at Software Carpentry -
http://swcarpentry.github.io/git-novice/ and at codeschool :
https://try.github.io/
